Alright everyone and welcome to one more new chapter.
In this chapter we are going to implement the email and password authentication and
everything is going to be local first.
That's why I am exploring this SQLite documentation.
So without wasting any time let's move ahead and start implementing it.
So first of first, first of all let me save everything, close everything.
Alright.
So, close this as well and I wanted you to go to the new PowerShell and install bunch
of thing with me.
So, the first thing I wanted you to install is the Expo SQLite.
So, Bunnex Expo install Expo SQLite.
And, along with that, yes, I also wanted to use here Expo secure store, perfect and after
that let me simply once again run bunx expo install expo secure store.
So, this is going to install the secure store as well.
And I think right now we are good to go.
Perfect.
We will see that whatever we need in future.
And first step is always set up the database.
We know that a local database.
So what I can do at the root level, let me create one.
lib, inside this lib let me simply create one db.ts and first thing let me simply import
SQLite from expo SQLite.
And yes, let me simply add here as perfect and what next after this I simply wanted to
say this as export const db is equals to SQLite open database async and let us go with sync.
And, inside this I can simply name it as auth dot db alright and then I can simply say export
function name it as init db ok and then I can simply say export execute sync and then
let me just simply write the query here.
So, this will basically going to create a table.
which is ID, email and password.
Alright, so let me just simply paste it.
Perfect, so this is basically going to be create table if not access.
I think I'm right.
All right.
Nice.
And after this, what we will do, so we are basically using the new sync API and execute
sync can run multiple statement at once, which is perfect for simple setup that we are doing.
Now, I wanted you to create a JWT helper.
So, you can definitely search more about what is JWT and how they work I am not explaining
you that here.
So, that is why I am just simply creating here the simple JWT utility.
So, this is a random secret you can add whatever you want a function that will basically convert
anything into base64 URL format getting a header getting a body getting a signature
and returning something like this.
This is simple.
All right, you can research more about JWT and again I am using here base64 URL.
So, the token is URL safe.
like a real JWT, real JWT is also token safe, this is not a real JWT and again this is not
a production grade, we are not doing any kind of hashing, no verification, no expiration,
this is just a simple a mock implementation of JWT.
Now let us move ahead and add some secure helpers, so that is going to be token.ts.
And let me add all the tokens that I need.
So I have basically used the secure store, a token key.
First one is the save token that will basically save that into the secure store.
Second is get the token.
Third is delete the token.
No problem.
Simple thing.
Nothing rocket science is going on.
So I hope you guys know.
Secure store encrypts values on the device which make it great for authentication tokens.
Now let's add a bunch of services related to authentication.
So I can simply say auth.ts and let me add all the methods that we need here.
Perfect.
first thing that I have basically added, what just happened.
is not assignable the parameter at all. This is wrong implementation and what I will do
I will just simply fix this up. Alright, so for fixing it up this is how I can basically
So, now you will see we have an email, we have password as well.
All right.
Actually, the mistake is in this method.
Instead of that, I need to run a run a sync.
All right.
And now we are good to go.
So, what we are actually doing while sign up, we are getting the email and password and
inserting that data and creating a token, saving the token, otherwise throwing error.
Easy.
All right, in same way we can login.
So how we are basically login?
We are selecting all the data basis of email and password and if we get that we are again
creating a token and again saving the token.
And for logout, we are simply deleting the token.
Simple, nothing very rocket science and I know this is not very production grade, but
I hope you got the basic idea.
After this, the only step that is left is the global state management.
So let me simply add one add ZooStat.
So this is a global state management tool that will help you to manage states.
Perfect.
So for ZooStand what you will do at the very top, we can simply create a store and inside
the store I can say auth.ts and inside this auth.ts let me first of all import the create
method from the ZooStand and get token from this library.
Easy, nice.
And first of all let me add the types.
So, first thing which is authenticated, we know that what is the use of it.
Then we have check auth, then we have login and then we have logout.
All right.
And then I will simply implement a hook around it.
So first of all, let me off my AI, snooze it out.
Perfect.
And let me just implement the hook.
So, this is export const use of create.
This is the type for it.
We have extracted the set is authentication as false checking off.
If we get the token, we are basically converting the token value to the Boolean and making it
false or true on the basis of this value be true the value beat, false value.
Then the login and if user we have based just for login we are simply setting is authenticated
to true and logout is authenticated to false.
If there is a token in secure store we mark you as a login.
No token means logged out kind of got it.
Now, let's move ahead and implement the login screen.
First of all, let me go to my app and where is my login screen?
This one.
Let me simply paste the entire code for it and let me just try to break down for you.
I have imported view, use state, a login method from the auth, this one.
Then use auth perfect created a state variable for email and password and set auth from here
and added basic handle login method which will accept a login as email and password
and we are setting the auth simple nothing rocket science is going on here perfect in
same way I can create one sign up screen so I can simply say signup.tsx.
Let me paste it.
Everything will same.
Just change the method to sign up.
Perfect.
Nice.
And let me also implement a logout or maybe we can create a logout component for it.
But for now, let's move ahead and start implementing it.
So, for that only one thing that we need to do simply go inside this and yes, let me import
that below this perfect and let us import the use auth.
And inside this use auth, let me call this callback and simply get is authenticated.
If the value is true, this will become true.
And let me add one more public route that is signup.
All right, let me try to save it and hopefully this will work.
Let me try to reload it once.
Perfect.
And we'll see is this going to work or not for us.
All right, let me just wait for it.
All right, and now you can see that we are redirected to login and let me try to and
again you first need to sign up.
So, let me first of all put up this sign up at the top.
me reload it once again.
And, yes now you guys can see that we are able to see a sign up page.
Let me try to put some data.
Suraj at the rate suraj.com and password is going to very hard password 123456789 0.
Wow!
Hopefully this will work.
Let me simply run sign up.
has been rejected caused by no such table.
Okay, sorry, one mistake and that is very heavy mistake because we never use this method.
What is the name of the method?
into dp.
So, for this let me move inside to the layout and inside the layout let me call my use effect
and this use effect will call this initDB function on the first render of the screen.
Perfect.
Hopefully, let me try to reload my app once again.
So just give me a minute.
And I think now our DB is initialized.
Hopefully let's move ahead and try to use this.
Let me again put Suraj at the rate suraj.com and 1234567890 a simple password sign up.
And property buffer does not exist.
Okay.
No problem.
Let me fix it.
Alright guys.
So, one very important point like by default buffer is not available in Expo.
So, what we can do we can again like this is the simple thing.
So, let me remove everything.
Let me also remove this.
as well and what I will do we are simply just whatever the payload data will come we can
simply say that as const raw json.stringify and whatever the data will come something
like this and I can right now as you know this is just a simple demo.
So I can say this as demo.demo.com.
and whatever the raw data we have.
All right.
And hopefully this will work right now.
Let me retry this.
Let me press on sign up.
Unique constraint fail.
All right.
fail because we have a
So, let me say, sooraj2, sign up and now we are sign up successfully.
If I again try go to the login, I can't, but I can go to private, I can go to profile,
I can again go to user settings.
Let me implement logout function as well.
So, for that let me go to the index.tsx and here I can import the button from react native
and first of all we have a title as logout.
And after this title what I can have, I can simply call on click here.
All right.
And after a simple on press, let me just simply say on press or simple async and let me open
it simply say await, call my logout and simply say use auth dot get state.
Yes, this is how you can get it.
call this and call this logout as well.
Hopefully this will work now.
If I simply press on logout, look at that.
Let me try to sign up once again.
Suraj or instead of sign up, we will log in actually, but it is fine.
Let me simply say suraj3.com.
123456 sign up and now we are again sign up again.
I can fetch the whole detail from the data, show the authenticated username that is also
possible.
But the main thing, the only thing that to understand here, this is how you can implement
authentication, a very basic authentication. Again, this is not that much protected, that
much good. Again, email password is a popular option when adding authentication to your
app. To make this flow user-friendly, you need to implement forget password and reset
password functionality so user who lose access to their account can recover them. No problem.
But if you want a quicker solution, so VIRL services offer built-in email and password
authentication including clerk.
Where is that?
Let me just come into here.
Yes, the lot of them provide you a clerk.
Clark will provide you and we have super base cognito Firebase better off a lot of them,
but you can even implement by our own self as well.
So it's up to you.
Perfect.
So with this, I can simply say this is the end of the chapter number two and see you
next time.